---
path: '/module-2.4/1-finding'
title: 'Finding defects'
hidden: false
---

This part of the course is devoted into further discovery of defects in
software.

Software is secure if the software keeps behaving correctly even in unexpected
situations (one may argue what the correct is). However, in order to make
secure software one needs to know how the software breaks. When you understand
how it breaks you know its weaknesses. These weaknesses could be used to make
an exploit against the software. One way to fix the situation is to fix the
weaknesses but sometimes the fix may take you back to the drawing board and
force you to redesign the software.

The weakness may be a bug that manifests itself on the implementation level.
However, some of the more serious flaws in software are design flaws on the
design level which are harder to find. Moreover, some security related flaws
come from the business logic level. Sometimes the security flaw may be caused
by all of the above together.

There is a high probability of a software having weaknesses and a chance of
someone trying to exploit them. The probability to have weaknesses rises when
the software gets more complex and has dependencies. Moreover, the attack
surface against the software gets bigger.


<text-box variant=emph name="Flaws are good at hiding">

Ross Andersson wrote an article on how this works. Flaws have many good hiding
places in large pieces of software.

Anderson, R. (2001). Why information security is hard - An economic
perspective. Proceedings - Annual Computer Security Applications Conference,
ACSAC, 2001-January, 358–365.
[https://www.acsac.org/2001/papers/110.pdf](https://www.acsac.org/2001/papers/110.pdf)

Our material actually has plenty of flaws. Every time a link is opened from
this page, the [target page could also influence this
page](https://www.w3.org/Bugs/Public/show_bug.cgi?id=28821).

</text-box>

## Binary Exploit

Here, we use the term Binary Exploit as an umbrella term to exploit compiled
applications in a way that leads the processor to function in an unwanted way.
This includes accessing or altering the memory of the application (or memory
spaces outside the applications intended boundaries).

<text-box variant=emph name="Introduction to the Central Processing Unit (CPU)">

When we are writing a program, we typically write it using a some sort of
programming language. Unfortunately though the computers do not understand
these languages -- they only speak binary. That is why we have compilers that
translate low-level languages to the language of the machine. While not all
languages are compiled to machine code, even these languages have to be
interpreted or compiled to machine code -- otherwise the computer would not be
able to run the program.

Since reading these instructions is really difficult for a human, this code is
often translated to a more readable form using a disassembler.

![Code abstraction levels](./code_abstraction_levels.svg)


The CPU has a limited set of registers where information can be stored and
simple operations can be performed upon. One of the more interesting registers
is the instruction pointer where the computer stores the location of the next
executable instruction. How computer executes instructions is roughly as
follows:

![Instruction lifecycle](./instruction_lifecycle.svg)

You can find more information about registers at
[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Processor_register).

</text-box>

One of the most common weaknesses gives an attacker the possibility to run code
on your system, which may have severe consequences. Here, the attacker will
abuse a flaw in the software in order to make it do something it was not
designed to do. As an example, you may have heard of the Heartbleed bug:

![How the heartbleed bug works](https://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/heartbleed_explanation.png)

_(source [xkcd: How the heartbleed bug works.](https://xkcd.com/1354/))_

Before a program is executed, it is loaded into memory. Once in memory, the
program can be executed, which is done by creating a process in the operating
system. The operating system also provides a chunk of memory for the use of the
process.

The memory chunk is divided into four sections called stack, heap, code and data.

The stack contains a collection of frames, each containing local variables and
function parameters and saved register values. Heap is an area that is used for
dynamic allocation of memory during the process runtime. When comparing the
stack and heap, each frame in the stack is alive only until the function that
the frame represents is returned from, whilst the heap contains objects that
are kept in memory until they are explicitly freed.

The code section contains the executable code of the program, and finally, the
data stores the global and static variables.

When a processor is executing the process, it uses the instruction pointer to
identify the current operation. When a function is called in the code, the
processor stores the function parameters and its current state into the stack,
and loads the necessary details of the function into use. When the function
finishes, the stack frame that was stored is popped from the stack and
execution continues.

_Note that the above is highly dependent on the way the execution is implemented._

<quiz id="7eeb29a9-bda0-5cc3-a378-de174ac24c32"></quiz>

<quiz id="46594f96-fa7b-5a0b-ab1e-ea0e8dc7fb38"></quiz>

If the attacker is able to write over the instruction pointer, then the
attacker can direct the execution of the process to code in an unexpected
location. But how can an attacker get their malicious code to the memory? One
way would be to identify and exploit a buffer overflow that writes the
malicious code to the stack and then overwrites the return address in the stack
frame. This way, once the function tries to return, it sets the instruction
pointer to point to our malicious code instead of the real return address.

As an attacker, we would like to make the instruction pointer to point to the
the start of the malicious binary code. Often, however, we do not know where
exactly the code starts and thus, we have to guess. One could try to debug the
program execution and input a known value to the buffer and then search for it
and identify the address of the value. However, the address may differ across
executions, but usually it is close by.

Finding the malicious code may be made easier by writing a bunch of [NOP
instructions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NOP) (No Operation Instruction) in
front of the malicious binary code. A NOP instruction does nothing but advances
the execution to the next instruction. If we jump into these big NOP blocks,
the instruction pointer just slides forward until it reaches our malicious code
-- this kind of technique is called a NOP slide.

<text-box variant=emph name="Validating input">

Sometimes when validating input in an application it may be easier to check that the input contains only the wanted characters (maybe regex `^[0-9a-zA-Z \-'_]+$`) and not the unwanted as there are less wanted once most of the time.

</text-box>

One source of potential binary exploits is improper memory management. In some
languages, like C, dynamic memory is manually managed by the programmer.
Undesired behaviour can occur for example when the programmer forgets to
allocate (reserve) memory, allocates the wrong amount of memory, forgets to
deallocate memory (results in a memory leak), or tries to use memory that has
already been deallocated.

<text-box variant=emph name="Exploits -- a flaw in language design?">

Are the programming languages that allow non-memory safe programs flawed by
design? Traditionally safe programming languages have been associated with a
higher run-time cost, so it seemed logical to shift the responsibility of the
safety to the programmer. This has not worked very well since even the best
codebases in the world suffer from these vulnerabilities. See:
[[1]](https://www.cvedetails.com/vulnerability-list/vendor_id-33/product_id-47/cvssscoremin-7/cvssscoremax-7.99/Linux-Linux-Kernel.html),
[[2]](https://nginx.org/en/security_advisories.html).

Some of the newer programming languages have been able to accomplish memory
safety without additional runtime cost. For example, the
[Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/) programming language accomplishes memory
safety entirely with compile time checks, resulting in safe programs that can
be as fast as the equivalent C programs.

</text-box>


### Binary Exploits and Higher Level Languages

One might think they don't have to worry about binary exploits since they're
programming with a higher-level language such as `Ruby`, `Python`, or `Java`.
Unfortunately, your application may still be vulnerable to these same problems.

If your higher-level language is interpreted, the interpreter might use a
unsafe language. For example [Ruby](https://github.com/ruby/ruby/) and
[Python](https://github.com/python/cpython) are both implemented in C. If there
is a security vulnerability in their code, such as a buffer overflow, all the
software that uses the vulnerable part is also vulnerable to the same problem.

Many programs written using higher level languages are taking advantage of
so-called native extensions. Native extensions are functionality that has been
implemented with a lower-level language mostly for performance reasons. Most of
these extensions are made with C and suffer from the same security risks as all
the other C-programs.


<text-box variant=emph name="Mitigating Binary Exploits">

So, what could one do to avoid binary exploits? -- plenty!

See some examples of what
[Microsoft](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/security/operations/security-intelligence-report)
(the older security reports at the bottom of the page, for example, volume 21 or 22 are more detailed) and
[Linux](https://7h3ram.blogspot.fi/2012/07/exploit-mitigation-techniques-on-linux.html)
do.

</text-box>


<quiz id="b8d0d489-0759-5160-afe1-3c6c7b610852"></quiz>


## Fuzzing

How to check against these flaws? The developer can read the code and try to
find problems or use an automated tool for static code analysis in order to
find suspicious code constructs. Another way to find problems is to try out as
much of different inputs as possible. This is called
[fuzzing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuzz_testing) (by Dr. Miller in the
early 1990s).

Fuzzing is a technique in which you create randomized inputs and feed them to
the target application in order to find crashes. Fuzzing is closest to
black-box methodology as you give the application an input and watch what
happens (fuzzers may also create valid inputs randomly). Fuzzers can be
employed as black-, grey- or white-box testing, depending on the access to the
target applications source code. you can get benefits from the source code as
you can better design the fuzzed inputs. Fuzzing can be divided into two basic
categories, to mutation and to generation based fuzzers.

Some good starting values that the fuzzer should consider.

- Long strings
- Blank strings
- Maximum values
- Minimum values
- Small values
- Large values
- Maximum divided by 2, 3, and 4 and near values
- null
- New line characters
- Semicolons and other separators
- Format string values (%s)
- Keywords

Fuzzer are great as with little effort fuzzers can create inputs that test the
most obvious cases. Fuzzing can find bugs that were missed in the manual code
review and gives an overall picture of the robustness of the code. However,
they cannot find bugs that alter the program execution but do not end in a
crash. Moreover, when you find a crash you still have to find what was the real
cause for it. The simplest way the crashes can be caught is to monitor the CPU
usage of the process or by running the application under debugger or other test
harness.



<quiz id="53e437dc-4bb8-5c0c-8d6e-67dd083877b7"></quiz>

<text-box variant=emph name="Sanitizing input">

Sometimes the effort to sanitize the input has some unwanted side-effects as
Harry Sintonen found out: "GNU `tar' archiver can be tricked into extracting
files and directories in the given destination, regardless of the path name(s)
specified on the command line." See,
[[3]](https://sintonen.fi/advisories/tar-extract-pathname-bypass.txt)

</text-box>

### Blind fuzzing

The simplest way to fuzz is to create inputs randomly without any knowledge of
valid inputs or of context. This is called blind fuzzing. The simplest way to
implement this would be to pipe /dev/random in Linux as the input. This is
efficient as it takes very little effort in creating the fuzz. This kind of
fuzzing could be used against, e.g., compression algorithms. Then again the
total randomness of it is also its weakness. Many applications expect some
structure in their inputs. Let's consider image manipulation applications, they
expect that the read file (input) starts the certain way, e.g., the JPEG File
Interchange Format (JFIF) says that the file starts with FF D8 in hexadecimal.
If the first bytes are not recognized the application should inform the user of
incorrect file format. As another example, network protocols expect the data to
be presented as with some structure containing key value pairs and even field
lengths. These kind of applications need more intelligent fuzzing than just
blind fuzzing. The fuzzer should at least have rudimentary knowledge of what
makes the input valid which makes creating the fuzz harder and it becomes a
balancing act of how much work you put into creating the fuzz and how complete
coverage of inputs you want it to have on the targeted application.

First step towards the smarter fuzzing is the mutation-based fuzzing in which a
large number of valid inputs are taken and then mutated in various ways. Some
parts of the valid inputs may experience bit flips, some parts of them might be
repeated, deleted, replaced, shuffled. Although mutation-based fuzzing takes
the valid inputs as its input the mutations are still random by nature. and no
coverage of the inputs is not guaranteed. These simple mutation-based methods
are good start for fuzzing simple network protocols, e.g., the fuzzers acts as
the man-in-the-middle and intercepts valid messages from the client, mutates
the messages, and gives them to the server. However, complex protocols need
more intelligence from the fuzzer.



### Smart fuzzers

If mutation-based fuzzing was called dumb-fuzzing, the generation-based fuzzing
is called the intelligent fuzzing. In generation-based fuzzing the input is
created from scratch based on the used specification or input format of the
targeted application or protocol. The input creation is then split into chunks,
which are built in order and independently. Randomness is introduced inside the
chunks. This way the inputs are not completely broken but contain some fuzzed
parts. How to split the inputs into chunks is usually defined by the input
format, e.g, fields such as key-value pairs etc. make good split points for
chunks.

Evolutionary-based fuzzing is basically the same as the mutation-based above
but it adds heuristics to the fuzzing which change the fuzzing on every
iteration. These fuzzer would look what the previous attempts did and change
the behaviour so that more parts of the code would be covered. These kinds of
fuzzers need compile-time instrumentation which adds instructions to the source
code of the targeted application that will allow monitoring of how the input
changed the execution path inside the application. Sometimes this kind of
fuzzing is called Instrumented fuzzing.

An alternative way for the randomness is to locate a large set of sample
inputs. Which are then fed to the instrumented application and out of those
runs the coverage of the execution path is recorded. Based on the execution
paths minimal set of inputs are collected that cover the most execution paths
inside the target. This is commonly called the corpus distillation, which aims
to calculate a set of inputs that is manageable in size and covers lots of
unusual execution paths in the target. The problem here might be how to get big
enough set of sample inputs.

Maybe the most complicated and time consuming is the Model-based fuzzing, also
known as syntax testing. In Model-based fuzzing the inputs are modeled using
context free languages. The commonly used languages include such as Backus-Naur
Form or Backus Normal Form (BNF), Abstract Syntax Notation (ASN.1) or an
Extensible Markup Language (XML) doctype. With these languages fields in the
syntax are modeled, manipulated and given as input to the target application.
The modeling can be time consuming and hard with the context free languages but
complex protocols such as Transport Layer security (TLS) would be hard to fuzz
with other methods.



### Fuzzing on the web

Fuzzing is not only related to binary applications, but can be used as a method
to test practically any application. When working with web applications, one
could for example seek to determine the types of inputs that could influence
the database of the application or cause a crash. In such a case, the security
analyst would determine the input parameters and paths that the application
_may_ accept, generate (either automatically or manually) a list of values to
attempt, and run the tests against the application.

Next, we will look into tools for this in more detail.




## Tools section

This section gives a brief introduction to couple of common tools in the trade.
This is only a small scratch of the surface and further tutorials and examples
can be found from the Internet.

<text-box variant=emph name="Warning">

- It should be remembered that hacking into other peoples computers is illegal.
- These tools especially the fuzzers should not be used against software in production use.
- Some of the antivirus programs may react to the fuzz test cases.

</text-box>

### Fuzzing

The previous sections have talked about fuzzing and it should now be clear that
for a successful fuzz the work flow is similar to the following.

- Gather input samples
- Fuzz the samples
- Run the tests
- Wait for a crash
- Start over again

About the gathering of the sample file set, one could get by with generating
the samples out of thin air randomly. However, better results can be gotten
with a set of samples to start from. The samples should represent the features
of the format to be fuzzed. In case of network protocols captures of the real
traffic are good starting points (with tools such as
[wireshark](https://wwww.wireshark.org) or [tcpdump](https://www.tcpdump.org)).
Sometimes just random files from the web will do. For example, bunch of
available PDFs from the web for testing PDF tools or images of corn from the
web to test image conversion tools.

There are many and many more fuzzers in existence. They basically do the same
thing but under the hood they differ from each other. Some mutate the inputs
using Burrows-Wheeler transformation and others permutate the content around
the edges of common substrings, etc.

<text-box variant=emph name="Shell">

In order to attempt the following examples yourself, you need access to a Unix
shell. If you have not used shell before, see this
[tutorial](https://www.shellscript.sh/) as a starting point.

We recommend -- if you are not using Linux or Mac -- that you install
VirtualBox and a Linux distribution such as Ubuntu on your computer. If you are
not familiar with how this could be done, follow the tutorial at
[https://www.lifewire.com/run-ubuntu-within-windows-virtualbox-2202098](https://www.lifewire.com/run-ubuntu-within-windows-virtualbox-2202098).

The VirtualBox/Ubuntu will come handy later as well.

</text-box>

Radamsa is a good example of a fuzzer, created at the University of Oulu.
Radamsa takes in a set of valid examples and fuzzes them. The output may
contain number of invalid files. Radamsa can be obtained as a current Git
snapshot from [Akihe Gitlab page](https://gitlab.com/akihe/radamsa) (which
works at least on GNU/Linux and Mac OS X boxes with git installed). You can
build it by doing the following:

```shell
git clone https://gitlab.com/akihe/radamsa.git
cd radamsa; make
bin/radamsa --help
```

To get the radamsa to produce fuzzed output is rather simple. In the following
example a string is piped to radamsa and radamsa prints out the mutated
version. Creating the samples one by one is daunting. Luckily radamsa gives
`-n` option so one can define how many samples it should create.

```shell
[user@laptop ~]$ echo "Cyber Security Base 101" | ./radamsa
Cyber Security Base 1701 1

[user@laptop ~]$ echo "Cyber Security Base 101" | ./radamsa -n 10
Cyber Security Base 1
Cyber Security Base 1
Cyber Security Base 340282366920938463463374607431768211455
Cyber󠁸 Security Base 101
Cyber Security Base -1601859698619483283371
Cyber Security Base -10973371󠀲18446744073709551617
Cyber 󠁖Security Base 0
Cyber Security Base 128
Cyber Security Base 102
Cyber Secu‪rity Base 101
Cyber Secu‪rity Base 128
```

With files it is easier to use the `-r` option to get radamsa to read all the
samples and `-o` option to write the mutated samples to some folder. With `%`
sign you can add the number of the iteration to the file name.


```shell
radamsa -n 100 -o output-samples/img-%n.jpg -r orig-samples/
```


By itself Radamsa does not inject the bad data to the target software. This has
to be done somehow. Below is a simple example of a Bash script that takes the
images created in the last example and feeds them to ImageMagick command-line
tool and lets it resize them a bit and makes a conversion to them.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
for f in output-samples/*
do
	convert "$f" -resize 99% imgmgck-output/$(basename "$f" | cut -d . -f1).png
done
```

ImageMagick will complain about malformed images etc (roughly half of the
mutated images were corrupt). But how do we know if something went really wrong
and the program crashed? One way is to check what the convert returned using
$?, which gives the return value of the last command. With classic test command
you can test if the result was larger than 127 (indication of fatal program
termination) and break the execution of the loop.

```bash
#!/bin/bash
for f in output-samples/*
do
	convert "$f" -resize 99% imgmgck-output/$(basename "$f" | cut -d . -f1).png
	test $? -gt 127 && break
done
```


More detailed instructions can be found from [Akihe Gitlab page](https://gitlab.com/akihe/radamsa).



### Test harnesses and debugging

The tools in the following list are more advanced and can be used to monitor
the target application more closely. The list is by no means exhaustive.

- [GDB](https://www.gnu.org/software/gdb/)
- [Valgrind](http://valgrind.org/)
- [strace](https://sourceforge.net/projects/strace/)
- [ltrace](https://linux.die.net/man/1/ltrace)

GNU Project debugger (GDB) is a debugger that allows us to inspect what goes on
inside another program while it is in execution. With GDB you can install
breakpoints into the code and stop the execution on specified conditions or
examine what happened when the program crashed.

Valgrind is an instrumentation framework for building dynamic analysis tools.
Some of the most interesting Valgrind tools can automatically detect memory
management and threading bugs. You can also use Valgrind to build new tools but
the distribution includes six production-quality tools: a memory error
detector, two thread error detectors, a cache and branch-prediction profiler, a
call-graph generating cache and branch-prediction profiler, and a heap
profiler.

Finally, strace and ltrace are a diagnostic, debugging and instructional
userspace utilities for Linux. Strace is used to monitor interactions between
processes and the Linux kernel, which include system calls, signal deliveries,
and changes of process state, whereas ltrace is used to trace library calls.

<text-box variant=emph name="Between a black box and a harness">

American Fuzzy Lop, or AFL, by Michal Zalewski, which is an instrumenting synthetic corpora fuzzer. It takes in a valid example and runs the target binary, evaluating the results, and then changes the input for maximum gains.

[Quick start Guide](http://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/QuickStartGuide.txt).

</text-box>


### BURP suite

This far this part of the course has concentrated on low level tools for
application security testing. Now it is time to introduce the first security
testing platform for security testing of web applications. It actually is a
collection of tools that work together to create the tests. It covers tests for
mapping and analysis of the vulnerabilities and even for exploiting them. Burp
Suite can easily be extended with plugins such as Bradamsa (radamsa for burp
Suite).

Burp suite can act as a proxy between the browser and target application and
intercept and modify the traffic between them. It also contains tools such as a
spider for crawling content and functionality, scanner for automatic detection
of known vulnerabilities, an intruder that can be used to perform customized
attacks. Here we look a bit into the proxy tool and how it works. As the last
thing in this tools section we look a little into the intruder tool and
specifically its sniper mode with bradamsa.

<text-box variant=emph name="Getting Burp">

Can be obtained from [Portswigger](https://portswigger.net/burp/download.html).
To run it, the following simple command is enough and gives the burp enough
memory to play with. Also the browser has to be configured to use a proxy. Burp
suite's default proxy address is 127.0.0.1:8080.

```shell
java -jar -Xmx1024m /path/to/burpsuite.jar
```

</text-box>


Burp proxy can be used to intercept the traffic between the browser and the
target application. It works really similar to man-in-the-middle attacks. To
test this feature we have a simple log in page that asks your credentials. The
intercept mode of the suite has to be on for it to capture the traffic. In the
intercept mode you have option to forward or drop the packets.

![login](./login.png)


The proxy captures the HTTP headers and cookie details. Also the forms username
and password are visible in the capture ("user" / "passwd"). Note that this was
HTTP and not HTTPS (which would need a bit more work with tools such as
SSLstrip script).

![capture](./capture.png)

The intruder tool is used to automize attacks against web applications. This
tool consists of four types of attacks: sniper, battering ram, pitchfork, and
cluster bomb. For these attacks to work the tool automatically searches all the
payload positions from the captured packets (see below in the image highlights
enclosed with &sect; signs). These positions are used by the attacks.

![capture](./sniper.png)

These positions are then replaced in the attack. With what are they replaced
with depends on the attacker. Simplest way is to make a list of "good guesses"
such as using a list of common passwords which are easily found from the net
(small snippet below). Also tools such as
[Bradamsa](https://github.com/ikkisoft/bradamsa), which is a Burp suite
extension that uses Radamsa to generate the intruder payloads, can be used to
create the payloads.

```output
123456
password
12345678
qwerty
123456789
12345
1234
111111
1234567
dragon
123123
baseball
abc123
football
monkey
letmein
696969
shadow
master
666666
qwertyuiop
123321
```

In the sniper attack only one of the positions is changed in sequence. In the
battering ram multiple parameters can be replaced from the same payload list.
In the pitchfork attack multiple lists of payloads for multiple parameters can
be used simultaneously. In the cluster bomb multiple lists of payloads are used
and all the combinations of them and the parameters are used. In this example
sniper attack is used with a small set of common passwords above and only the
password payload is changed.

![single password](./single-passwd.png)

![attack](./attack.png)


The attack then tries all the passwords and gathers the resulting answers from
the server (here only 501 replies as there was really nothing suitable
listening on the other end). Next, you get to try this yourself!


<programming-exercise name="HackMyPassword" tmcname="Set4-01.HackMyPassword">

The assignment template contains a small web application that needs to be hacked.

Your "friend" forgot his password, and you need to "retrieve it". You have
figured out that his username is "ted". Using burp suite and a suitable list of
passwords (pick the top 10000 passwords from
[https://github.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/tree/master/Passwords](https://github.com/danielmiessler/SecLists/tree/master/Passwords)),
determine the password for your "friend".

Note that if you do not own the license for Burp Suite, we highly recommend
that you choose [OWASP
Zap](https://www.owasp.org/index.php/OWASP_Zed_Attack_Proxy_Project). Doing
this assignment with the free version of Burp Suite will take very long.

Once you find out the password, change the return value of the method
<code>thePassword</code> in the class <code>IFiguredItOut</code> to match the
correct password and submit the assignment to the server.

</programming-exercise>

<text-box variant=emph name="Just password hacking?">

Whilst the previous practical example was about hacking a password, you can use
Burp Suite (or OWASP Zap) to scan web applications for any vulnerabilities.
Even though there are no explicitly outlined assignments for this in this
material we still recommend and expect that you try out those tools with the
WebGoat server from last week!

</text-box>


Here, we looked at a few methods for finding vulnerabilities. In the next part,
we will look into security issues in up to date web applications as well as
study the culture related to fixing such issues in a rapid fashion.
